>> Spring has been shown to be
the best time for a cleanse,
which may just be the
best action you can take
for your health today.
And the ancient
science of ayurveda
provides a safe, evidence-based,
and comprehensive way to do it.
>> The body can become
more self-aware,
more aware of problems and
as problems and initiate
a natural, involuntary,
spontaneous healing response.
>> This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
Cleansing or
detoxing the body has
been a key practice
throughout the 5,000
years of ayurveda's history as
a system of natural healing.
Now, research explains
the impressive results
of the ayurvedic cleanse.
Dr. John Douillard is a
leading ayurvedic practitioner
who has been incorporating
ayurvedic detox programs
in his practice for decades.
He explains that
poor digestion is
at the core of the need
for detoxification.
>> I think most people don't
realize that our ability
to digest well is directly
linked to our ability
to detoxify well.
In one survey reported, 74%
of the American population
have a digestive
imbalance of some kind.
Suggesting that
not only are we not
getting the nutrition in
that we need, but we're also
not getting the waste out
as efficiently as we could.
And there's waste or
impurities or toxins
or pollutants kind
of everywhere.
So even if you eat really
clean, which is obviously
a really important
thing, you're still
being exposed to
toxicity which means
that you have to be able to
digest well to detoxify that.
And that's why ayurveda
was all about making
sure every change
of seasons we do
a digestive reset,
a deep rejuvenation,
repair for the digestion and
detox organs and pathways.
You're actually creating
a whole new population
of bugs in your
gut that are based
on this year's model which gives
you the stability and immunity
for the entire year.
>> Given these
compelling reasons,
what are the best indicators
to notice if it's time for you
to do a cleanse?
>> How is your digestion?
Do you have a food intolerance?
You look on your
tongue in the morning.
If it's white or coated,
ayurveda calls it "Ama"
or undigested food, or
you're toxic, you're tired,
you're not getting the energy
from the lymph delivery of fat.
Your immune system
is compromised
and you can't take
the trash out,
so it's hard to come
out through your skin.
You get brain fog, headaches,
rashes, indigestion,
all these things
begin to happen.
>> So just how does this
toxicity build up according
to ayurveda?
>> The fat, soluble,
heavy metals,
environmental
pollutants, pesticides,
endocrine disruptors,
they're all fat soluble,
which means they have to be
broken down from being fat
soluble to water soluble before
your body can get rid of them.
That's the liver's
job and the liver
takes a beating in our culture.
The liver gets overwhelmed
and becomes sludgy with bile.
The bile becomes thicker
and more viscous.
Now, your whole upper digestive
defense is just compromised.
>> The ayurvedic cleanse seeks
to address these root digestive
issues to help the body reset.
And now there are mainstream
scientific studies
to support and explain
just how this happens.
>> So ayurveda has a cleansing
system using ghee as sort
of the main driver
of the cleanse.
Now, ghee or
clarified butter, that
uses a natural key layer which
means the detoxifying agent
to pull impurities out
of your deep tissues.
And now, we have science to
back that up with something
called lipophilic
mediated detox where
you take a little bit of
ghee in your diet that kicks
your body into fat burning.
Then you have a no fat diet
for the rest of the day.
And what that does is
that forces your body
to stay in fat metabolism
during the day.
The key is to get your
body into fat burning.
>> Other components of the
ayurvedic cleanse include
the incorporation of an easily
digestible mix of mung beans
and rice called kitchari,
various ayurvedic herbs,
and meditative practices to
dial down the nervous system.
Dr. Douillard has for decades
seen the profound benefits
of this protocol.
>> While you're pulling fat
out of your deep tissues,
ayurveda says that the
molecules of emotion,
the old emotional toxins--
the mental Ama it's called--
are stored in your
fat and your muscle.
So when you're
doing this cleanse,
you're pulling those toxins
out of your fat cells
and they're becoming
more on-screen,
you're becoming more
self-aware of those.
You begin to have a level
of clarity and awareness
that you didn't have before.
More aware of problems;
some problems and initiate
a natural involuntary
spontaneous healing response.
>> Thankfully, the wisdom
of this ancient science is
available to all who are
interested in getting
at the root cause of disease
and uncovering true well-being.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.